# Docker-ISIS

Docker container images for planetary data analysis. 
This repository defines a docker container with USGS/ISIS toolkit pre-set.
So planetary data provided by NASA's Planetary Data System (PDS) could/can be
processed anywhere with Docker installed.

Around the ISIS image there is "Gispy" and "ISIS-ASP". The former is an
image with GIS Python packages to provide a modern data analysis environment
based on Jupyter Notebooks. Per default, Gispy is based on `jupyter/scipy-notebook`.
The latter, ISIS-ASP, extends "ISIS" with Ames Stereo Pipeline.
Finally, the ISIS image is an extention of Gispy, with the USGS/ISIS installed.

Images tree:

    ---------     --------     ------------
    | gispy | --> | isis | --> | isis-asp |
    ---------     --------     ------------


The "ISIS" container is defined in 
[`dockerfiles/isis.dockerfile`](`dockerfiles/isis.dockerfile`),
next to the other images (in [`dockerfiles/`](dockerfiles/)):

- `gispy`: Jupyter-Lab for Python Geographical (GIS) data analysis
- `isis`: Jupyter-Lab server with USGS/ISIS install (based in `gispy`)
- `isis-asp`: Extension of `isis` with AMES Stereo Pipeline installed 

The corresponding images can be downloaded from GMAP repository in DockerHub:

- `gmap/jupyter-gispy`: latest build of `gispy.dockerfile`
- `gmap/jupyter-isis`: latest build of `isis.dockerfile`
- `gmap/jupyter-isis-asp`: latest build of `isis-asp.dockerfile`

If you want to *build* your own images, check 
the *readme* in `dockerfiles/`](dockerfiles/README.md).

Summary:

1. [Requirements](#requirements)
1. [How to use](#how-to-use)
2. [Contents](#contents)


## Requirements

### Docker

Docker ([Engine or Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/alternatives/))
is all you need to run or build these images.
See the following Docker documents for instructions on how to obtain it
and how it works:

* https://docs.docker.com/get-docker
* https://www.docker.com/get-started


### ISIS-Data

If using ISIS tools, you'll probably need "`ISISDATA`" (the space-planetary 
missions and instruments support data). ISIS-Data is NOT included in the 
container(s).

For instructions on obtaining ISIS-Data, see the official docs at:

* https://github.com/DOI-USGS/ISIS3/blob/dev/README.md#The-ISIS-Data-Area

In the next section you'll learn how to use it.


## How to use

This section is somewhat long because we go through the various options you
have when running these images, in particular `jupyter-isis`.
We assume no particular knowledge with `docker`, hence the many steps we'll
go through.

> If you are familiar with Docker and Jupyter and ISIS, you can skip to
> sub-section [Command-line summary](#command-line-summary)

Subsections:

- [Run Docker container, the basics](#run-docker-container-the-basics)
- [Accessing Jupyter-Lab](#accessing-jupyter-lab)
    * [Get *token* from terminal](#get-token-from-terminal)
    * [Define *password* beforehand](#define-password-beforehand)
- [Accessing host data](#accessing-host-data)
    * [Mount ISISDATA](#mount-isisdata)
- [Advanced use]


### Run Docker container, the basics

> The instruction below assume the use of a terminal (cli), if you are not
> used to command-line interfaces, don't worry, you can achieve the same
> through the graphical interface provided by Docker Desktop.

Running the (jupyter-isis) container is a two-steps process:

- *Pull* (or *download*) the (jupyter-isis) image:
```bash
docker pull gmap/jupyter-isis
```


- And *run* it. Pay attention to the `--port` argument:
```bash
docker run --rm --port 8888:8888 gmap/jupyter-isis
```

> The `--port` argument is necessary because the interface we are going to 
> use -- Jupyter-Lab -- is accessible through our host's port `8888`.
>
> The other argument, `--rm` is responsible for automatic remove of of
> the container when you finish using it. 


### Accessing Jupyter-Lab

"Jupyter-ISIS" containter is running, and an instance of Jupyter-Lab
should be available at [http://localhost:8888](http://localhost:8888).
If you go there (in your browser), you should see a login page, where a 
passphrase (password, token) is requested.

There are two ways you can authenticate and login into a Jupyter-Lab instance:

1. (default) you get the *token* generated by Jupyter, from the terminal;
2. you define the password beforehand, when you `run` the container.


#### Get *token* from terminal

If you go straight to [http://localhost:8888](http://localhost:8888) you'll
notice a *passphrase* or *token* is required. 
Such information you find in the output from the latest command, `docker-run`,
you should see something *like*:

```
    To access the server, open this file in a browser:
        file:///home/jovyan/.local/share/jupyter/runtime/jpserver-7-open.html
    Or copy and paste one of these URLs:
        http://51476fe2885f:8888/lab?token=19aa3371154d1a74d726c2b422fd134ac881827b44e69d40
        http://127.0.0.1:8888/lab?token=19aa3371154d1a74d726c2b422fd134ac881827b44e69d40
```
The value of `token` is unique to each (run) session, you can copy-and-paste
the token string (eg, `19aa3371154d1a74d726c2b422fd134ac881827b44e69d40`)
in the authentication page at `localhost:8888`.


#### Define *password* beforehand

When instanciating the container (*ie*, when `docker-run` is executed)
you can define an environment variables in `gmap/jupyter-isis`.
The variable responsible for Jupyter-Lab password is `JUPYTER_TOKEN`,
the value you define for this variable will be the login password.

For example,

```bash
docker run --name isis_tmp --port 8888:8888 -e JUPYTER_TOKEN='bla' gmap/jupyter-isis
```

will define `bla` as password for this (`isis_tmp`) container.
You can now go to `http://localhost:8888` and type `bla` in the corresponding
field there.
You should then be redirected to a Jupyter-Lab workspace.


### Accessing host data

Docker containers run in an isolated environment, meaning it is not possible
to access the contents of the host system unless explicitly required.
For example, if you want to access the content of directory `/data` from 
inside the (jupyter-isis) container, you must "say" so when *instantiating*
the container (*ie*, when `docker run`*ning*).

In practice, to *share* a directory from your computer (*eg*, `/data`)
with the (jupyter-isis) container, you will use `docker run` option `-v`:

```bash
docker run  -v "/data:/mnt/data" \
            -p 8888:8888 gmap/jupyter-isis
```

In the command above we *bound* host's `/data` directory to 
container's `/mnt/data` directory through option `-v` (*volume*)

You can mount as many volumes (*ie*, directories) as you want.
For example, suppose we want to analyse some data from Mars, and for that
we are going to use raster and vector datasets from two diferent directories,
'`/data/raster/mars`' and '`/data/vector/mars`'.

We can share *both* directories with the container.
In this case, we can bind `/data/{raster,vector}/mars` directories to 
container's `/mnt/data/mars/{raster,vector}` paths:

```bash
docker run  -v /data/raster/mars:/mnt/data/mars/raster \
            -v /data/vector/mars:/mnt/data/mars/vector \
            -p 8888:8888 gmap/jupyter-isis
```

Now, from inside the container, if you inspect the content of those
directories, `/mnt/data/*`, you should see the very same content of the
respective ones in the host system (`/data/*`).


### Mount ISISDATA

`ISISDATA` is a directory you will give to `jupyter-isis` everytime you
run it if you want to make use of the ISIS tools.

The ISIS tools inside jupyter-isis expect ISISDATA to be provided at
'`/isis/data`'

Suppose I download ISIS Data into my system's `/path/to/isisdata` directory.
I'd run jupyter-isis as follows:

```bash
docker run  -v /path/to/isisdata:/isis/data \
            -p 8888:8888 gmap/jupyter-isis
```

Inside the container, you should see the content of ISISDATA inside
`/isis/data`.


## Contents

* USGS ISIS v7.1.0
* NASA AMES Stereo Pipeline (ASP) v3.2.0
* jupyter-stack/scipy-notebook  
* GISPY image containing several common used python package for processing planetary images and GIS data (e.g. rasterio, spectral, fiona, shapely) and various utilities (e.g. numpy, matoplotlib, pandas, scikit-image, etc)

Then ISIS v7 can be used in jupyterlab terminal or jupyter noteboo through [kalasiris](https://github.com/rbeyer/kalasiris) package by adding in the first cell of the notebook the following code:
```
import os
os.environ["ISISROOT"]="/opt/conda/envs/isis/"
os.environ["ISISDATA"]="/isis/data"
import kalasiris as isis
```
For an example notebook see [PyISIS-Parallel](https://github.com/Hyradus/PyISIS-Parallel/tree/main/PyISIS-Parallel)

_____________________
*This work is supported the Europlanet 2024 RI and EXPLORE project, 
it has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
Research and Innovation programme under grant agreement 
No 871149 and No 101004214.*
