# Deployment

[1]: https://jupyter-docker-stacks.readthedocs.io
[2]: https://github.com/jupyter/docker-stacks

The (Docker) images we build here are custom versions of Jupyter' Docker Stacks
([1][], [2][]).
Since they expand (with packages and some extensions) the Jupyter images,
their deployment works pretty much the same.

> In principle, as of this writting, our images are being published on
> DockerHub; this is one difference respect to Jupyter's (using Quay.io).
> See the [Developers](developers.md) document for release/publishing details.

**Necessarily** -- to access the Jupyter (Lab) interface --, when you
"docker-run" an image you want to **share container's port `8888`**.

*Optionally*, you may want to simplify the *login* process by defining a
*password* through the `JUPYTER_TOKEN` (container) environment variable.

> See https://jupyter-docker-stacks.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html#quick-start
> for general instructions on running Jupyter Docker images.

When running an **ISIS** images (ie, `jupyter-isis`, `jupyter-isis-asp`),
you (likely) *want to* mount the **ISIS-Data** directory (from host system)
in the container's `ISISDATA=/isis/data`.

> See https://github.com/DOI-USGS/ISIS3/blob/dev/README.md#The-ISIS-Data-Area
> for current ways of getting ISIS-Data.

## How to run

This section is somewhat long because we go through the various options you
have when running these images, in particular `jupyter-isis`.
We assume no particular knowledge with `docker`, hence the many steps we'll
go through.

> If you are familiar with Docker and Jupyter and ISIS, you can skip to
> sub-section [Command-line summary](#command-line-summary)

Subsections:

- [Run Docker container, the basics](#run-docker-container-the-basics)
- [Accessing Jupyter-Lab](#accessing-jupyter-lab)
    * [Get *token* from terminal](#get-token-from-terminal)
    * [Define *password* beforehand](#define-password-beforehand)
- [Accessing host data](#accessing-host-data)
    * [Mount ISISDATA](#mount-isisdata)


### Run Docker container, the basics

> The instruction below assume the use of a terminal (cli), if you are not
> used to command-line interfaces, don't worry, you can achieve the same
> through the graphical interface provided by Docker Desktop.

Running the (jupyter-isis) container is a two-steps process:

- *Pull* (or *download*) the (jupyter-isis) image:
```bash
docker pull gmap/jupyter-isis
```


- And *run* it. Pay attention to the `--port` argument:
```bash
docker run --rm -p 8888:8888 gmap/jupyter-isis
```

> The `-p` argument is necessary because the interface we are going to
> use -- Jupyter-Lab -- is accessible through our host's port `8888`.
>
> The other argument, `--rm` is responsible for automatic remove of of
> the container when you finish using it.


### Accessing Jupyter-Lab

"Jupyter-ISIS" containter is running, and an instance of Jupyter-Lab
should be available at [http://localhost:8888](http://localhost:8888).
If you go there (in your browser), you should see a login page, where a
passphrase (password, token) is requested.

There are two ways you can authenticate and login into a Jupyter-Lab instance:

1. (default) you get the *token* generated by Jupyter, from the terminal;
2. you define the password beforehand, when you `run` the container.


#### Get *token* from terminal

If you go straight to [http://localhost:8888](http://localhost:8888) you'll
notice a *passphrase* or *token* is required.
Such information you find in the output from the latest command, `docker-run`,
you should see something *like*:

```
    To access the server, open this file in a browser:
        file:///home/jovyan/.local/share/jupyter/runtime/jpserver-7-open.html
    Or copy and paste one of these URLs:
        http://51476fe2885f:8888/lab?token=19aa3371154d1a74d726c2b422fd134ac881827b44e69d40
        http://127.0.0.1:8888/lab?token=19aa3371154d1a74d726c2b422fd134ac881827b44e69d40
```
The value of `token` is unique to each (run) session, you can copy-and-paste
the token string (eg, `19aa3371154d1a74d726c2b422fd134ac881827b44e69d40`)
in the authentication page at `localhost:8888`.


#### Define *password* beforehand

When instanciating the container (*ie*, when `docker-run` is executed)
you can define an environment variables in `gmap/jupyter-isis`.
The variable responsible for Jupyter-Lab password is `JUPYTER_TOKEN`,
the value you define for this variable will be the login password.

For example,

```bash
docker run --name isis_tmp --port 8888:8888 -e JUPYTER_TOKEN='bla' gmap/jupyter-isis
```

will define `bla` as password for this (`isis_tmp`) container.
You can now go to `http://localhost:8888` and type `bla` in the corresponding
field there.
You should then be redirected to a Jupyter-Lab workspace.


### Accessing host data

Docker containers run in an isolated environment, meaning it is not possible
to access the contents of the host system unless explicitly required.
For example, if you want to access the content of directory `/data` from
inside the (jupyter-isis) container, you must "say" so when *instantiating*
the container (*ie*, when `docker run`*ning*).

In practice, to *share* a directory from your computer (*eg*, `/data`)
with the (jupyter-isis) container, you will use `docker run` option `-v`:

```bash
docker run  -v "/data:/mnt/data" \
            -p 8888:8888 gmap/jupyter-isis
```

In the command above we *bound* host's `/data` directory to
container's `/mnt/data` directory through option `-v` (*volume*)

You can mount as many volumes (*ie*, directories) as you want.
For example, suppose we want to analyse some data from Mars, and for that
we are going to use raster and vector datasets from two diferent directories,
'`/data/raster/mars`' and '`/data/vector/mars`'.

We can share *both* directories with the container.
In this case, we can bind `/data/{raster,vector}/mars` directories to
container's `/mnt/data/mars/{raster,vector}` paths:

```bash
docker run  -v /data/raster/mars:/mnt/data/mars/raster \
            -v /data/vector/mars:/mnt/data/mars/vector \
            -p 8888:8888 gmap/jupyter-isis
```

Now, from inside the container, if you inspect the content of those
directories, `/mnt/data/*`, you should see the very same content of the
respective ones in the host system (`/data/*`).


### Mount ISISDATA

`ISISDATA` is a directory you will give to `jupyter-isis` everytime you
run it if you want to make use of the ISIS tools.

The ISIS tools inside jupyter-isis expect ISISDATA to be provided at
'`/isis/data`'

Suppose I download ISIS Data into my system's `/path/to/isisdata` directory.
I'd run jupyter-isis as follows:

```bash
docker run  -v /path/to/isisdata:/isis/data \
            -p 8888:8888 gmap/jupyter-isis
```

Inside the container, you should see the content of ISISDATA inside
`/isis/data`.
## Docker-Compose

The primary purpose of the [`compose.yml`](/compose.yml) in this repository
is to provide a default building (template) for the images we offer, and
-- secondarily -- to provide examples for running them (ports, volumes, etc.).

The Compose file is *NOT* meant to be used simply as `docker compose up`,
simply because the (three) services defined there are NOT meant to run
simultaneously!
Nevertheless, you can -- YES -- use it to run each service individually.

For example (notice the service-name after `up`):

```bash
docker compose up jupyter-isis
```

THe building and further customization of the images/services is explained
in document [Developers](developers.md).
